Once around Titan,
Titan, the giant moon of Saturn,
discovered back in the year 1655 by
Christian Huygens
after whom the lander that parachuted
down through the atmosphere dropped by
the Cassini probe uh was named. It's a
European Space Agency probe called
Huygens. that hitched a ride on the NASA
Cassini all the way out to Saturn and
then separated and descended down onto
Titan by parachute.
The moon itself is relatively easy to
see. Even a pair of binoculars looking
at Saturn, you can pick up Titan. Um,
and certainly with a small telescope,
it's uh visible pretty much all the time
if you know what you're looking at.
small dot round about three or four
times Saturn's diameter away from the
body in a sort of characteristic
position and brightness.
Now, when we look at it with our
powerful telescopes, we see this smooth
yellowy orange ball
because all we're looking at is the
cloud tops of this smogfilled
atmosphere. And we really have a problem
seeing what is going on underneath that
layer of very, very thick cloud.
Once thought to be the largest moon in
the solar system, it's got a diameter of
just over 5,000 kilometers. Makes it
larger than the planet Mercury. Um, but
we were overestimating its diameter
originally because of this very thick
atmosphere. Uh, the rocky body itself
puts it in second place, second to
Ganymede, the largest moon of Jupiter.
So, no longer seen as the largest moon
in the solar system.
Now, it orbits around Saturn and it's a
billion miles from the sun and so that
makes it very cold indeed.
Not very much sunlight reaching that uh
far out. And although the
temperature at such a distance would be
very cold, that atmosphere does provide
a significant greenhouse effect and
brings it up to only minus 180° C. Uh
that's uh really quite chilly. So much
so that any water present is frozen up
as ice. And we're talking about a very
very hard freeze making the rock that we
uh would find on the surface actually be
formed of ice which is almost as hard as
steel under those very low temperatures.
Now the atmosphere is 1.5 times as the
density of our own. So that's really the
only other body uh in the solar system
apart from the gas giant planets that
has a substantial atmosphere beyond the
earth
and like our own it's primarily actually
nitrogen.
There is the thick orange smog layer
blocking our view. And we know from
infrared spectroscopes
looking at the wavelengths of light
coming back that we can see methane and
ethane and other organic compounds in
that smog. Uh things like hydrogen
cyanide, carbon dioxide, carbon
monoxide. All of these are very visible
because they have very prominent
spectral lines. And it's one of the
problems with reporting what we can see
by spectroscopy.
That's a very biased sample. it always
is able to uh report the molecules that
are easy to find which show up much
better than all the others that have uh
much less powerful spectral lines and uh
are much harder to spot. So we have to
watch out that when we report what we
see we don't assume that that's all that
there is.
Now, when we look at it with infrared,
we can see a little bit through that um
smog layer and get down to the surface.
So, this is an infrared picture of Titan
taken by a telescope from the Earth and
you can see something going on on the
surface through that thick hazy
atmosphere, but it's not very detailed
at all. To get detailed images, we
really had to wait until suitably
equipped probes were able to do flybys
and get up close and personal with
Titan. And we got this rather better
image here. As a result, again,
infrared, so it can see through a
majority of the smog. We can still see
some white streaky clouds that look like
cirrus clouds and some dark markings on
the surface there. Looks like there's
sort of different regions and then some
darker spots up around the uh the top
part of the image of the disc there. And
when we look in more detail at some of
those and get some really close shots,
we start to see things like this. We
have rivers and lakes. The river
channels are obvious in that lower
image, the uh dendritic form where they
are meandering and coming together and
increasing in size just as they get for
satellite views of rivers on Earth. And
in the top picture there, there is a
lake, a small kidney bean-shaped dark
area. And we know it's a lake. We can
see the radar reflections from the
surface and see that it's very very flat
indeed. So flat that it really has to be
a liquid. And uh you can even bounce the
radar off and penetrate into it a bit
and make an estimate of the depth in
some cases. So we know that these are
rivers and lakes, but they're not rivers
and lakes of water. As I've already
said, water at minus 180 degrees
centigrade would be frozen up hard as
iron.
So, what is this material? Well, it's
organic. It's liquid natural gas,
methane, with methane and its uh heavier
brother ethane and other organic
molecules mixed together into an organic
soup that is flowing as a liquid over
the surface. It's raining onto the high
ground. It's snowing onto the peaks of
the mountains, but that snow is methane
and ethane snow. And then the melt is
flowing down the channels, eroding them,
creating these uh
uh winding river channels and filling up
the low-lying areas as lakes. And I said
it was raining. Well, we've certainly
seen dynamic weather on Titan. This is
images from the 2005
approach. And you can see in the left
hand image there are fluffy clouds and
that they have moved and it's clearly
been raining because the pattern of
puddles, ponds and lakes on the surface
there has changed as the uh amount of
liquid has uh built up.
And you can really see that not only as
individual rain clouds but as different
seasons on Titan.
This is a particular lake and the inset
area there of a little promonry of land
coming out into the lake with that sort
of finger of uh promonry
coming out into the darker lake material
has changed in shape between the three
photographs on the left there from 2013
14 and 15 as the level of the lake has
risen and fallen. And if you look all
around the lake, you can see the river
channels leading into it. So that we
know that there are these weather
patterns and that the uh rainfall of
liquid methane
changes and the level of the lake goes
up and down. And of course it would
because the angle at which Titan is
orbiting around Saturn is a fairly flat
equatorial plane. But there is an
inevitable tilt and so you get seasons
on Titan just as you do with the seasons
on Earth.
Now I mentioned that the Cassini mission
flew to to Saturn taking the Huygens's
probe with it and Huygens was parachuted
down in January. It landed on the
surface of 2005
and it uh was absolutely spectacular
pictures coming back. Here's the first
wide angle shot taken looking downwards
at the surface just as it's penetrated
the cloud layer and you can see some
river channels and the tops of some
mountains.
As it descended and got closer, we saw
more slightly fisheye picture. Here we
have that range of mountains just left
of center and a valley full of rivers
and river channels over there perhaps
carving their way through a frosted
landscape
in the valley between the two mountain
ranges. Perhaps a higher altitude
plateau there and then lower down the
darker regions again with some slightly
less distinct river channels there. And
the area we're looking at is the landing
site because as the probe spun round and
came down on its parachute, it landed on
a beach. And the beach is covered in
these round pebbles. And the pebbles
tell us that there has been liquid water
flow. Not liquid water flow, liquid flow
at some point. Probably that liquid
methane and ethane mixture again. and
um the erosion has caused the pebbles to
round off as they do in water on the
beaches uh of Earth.
Now, another feature that we also
detected with infrared through the
clouds from the orbiter was ice
volcanoes.
So, there is heat within the center of
the planet still. I call it a planet. If
it orbited the sun, it really would be a
planet. Um, but it's a planet-sized moon
because it orbits Saturn. And the heat
from the core in the center is creating
some volcanic activity. But the
material involved is water and water ice
rather than lava. And so this is a cryo
volcano, a low temperature volcano. But
it is pointing back to the fact that
there may well be
warmer layers beneath where there could
be liquid water either in layers or
pockets underneath the overall crust of
this fascinating little world. And it
begs the really important question,
could there be life on Titan? This image
to the left is Titan, but it looks so
much like the Earth. It really stresses
the point.
And if we look back in the history of
the earth, it's possible that our
atmosphere
was very very similar to the current
atmosphere of Titan with nitrogen
dominating but a lot of organic material
and uh irradiation from the sun and
lightning
mixing with those gases as we can do in
the lab. The energy from the sunlight
and the electrostatic discharges and so
forth
is enough to excite the gases, knock
electrons off them, and have them
recombine into an organic soup of
complicated molecules. And maybe this is
enough organic material to start
chemical evolution,
perhaps even all the way to some form of
living system. perhaps in the methane
lakes perhaps not based on water.
There's very strong reasons why we see
water as exceptional as a solvent in
which life can operate because it's very
good at dissolving things um and
the uh allows a lot of chemical
reactions to occur. But other reactions
at lower temperatures with different
substances
can't be ruled out.
And of course, those cryo volcanoes
point to deeper underground lakes of
water or water containing ammonia and
other interesting chemicals acting as
antifreeze.
So, there's a lot more to learn about
Titan. And one of the missions that I
hope gets off the ground and goes out to
Titan is the Dragonfly mission. And the
plan is to send a drone and to land on
the surface with a lander and dispatch
this uh little drone to fly through the
atmosphere. We've already flown a drone
on Mars called Ingenuity
and Mars has a very very thin atmosphere
indeed. It would be so much easier to do
this on Titan except of course we
wouldn't really be able to rely on solar
power. There's not going to be much
sunlight at a billion miles from the
sun, unlike the uh conditions on Mars
where uh it's not quite the sunlight
that we have on Earth, but it's not far
different. This is so far from the sun
that solar power really doesn't work.
And certainly with all that thick smog,
you've got no chance. So this would have
to be getting its power from uh nuclear
batteries,
radioisotope generators.
And if you want to know more about the
Dragonfly mission, then I have a video
on this subject which was a talk
recorded by Professor Sarah Hurst, which
is uh one of the chief scientists on the
project. So I won't repeat all of that,
but you can look on the channel and
you'll find that in the members area. I
think uh all the talks by other people I
have to put into the members area.
So that's uh a very interesting video in
its own right. And other missions have
been suggested to fly out to Titan and
release probes on a balloon to float
around in the atmosphere. Um, again
avoiding the need for too much by way of
uh power to keep it in the air, just the
power for the instruments, but it was
still going to need a nuclear battery or
indeed robotic submarines. And I really
wish they would do that. I wish that the
Dragonfly mission was taking a small
submarine and could drop it into the big
lakes. the Kraken Mare is one of the big
lakes on Titan and snoop around to see
what lies beneath in the deep
dark methane lakes of Titan. Um, I
really hope that we managed to do that
and that I am around long enough to see
it. So, that was my whistle stop tour
once around Titan. And I'll leave you
with that very Earthlike picture of this
fascinating world in the outer solar
system. Thanks very much for listening.